README.md, before:

# Cutlery: automated pipeline and utilities for CUT&RUN data analysis

## 0. Prerequisite

### 0.1. LimLabBase

This pipeline heavily relies on LimLabBase. Therefore, setup github.com/LimLabBase first.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimLabBase
```
And add the subfolders of the LimLabBase in the PATH of .bash_profile or .bashrc

### 0.2. Other software packages

Mostly available in the HPC/BMI

- Homer
- cutadapt
- STAR (> v2.7.4)
- bedtools
- samtools
- bedGraphToBigWig (UCSC utilities)
- bwtool
- gawk
- sed
- R


## 1. Setting Cutlery for CUT&RUN data analysis

### 1.1. Git clone:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/hwlim/Cutlery
```

### 1.2. Declare environment for Cutlery in .bash_profile (or .bashrc)

```bash
# For Cutlery location
# This environment variable is used in many Cutlery scripts to locate basic resource
# Replace <path_to_Cutlery> with as needed
export CUTLERY=<path_to_Cutlery>

# PATH for Cutlery scripts and executables
export PATH=${PATH}:${CUTLERY}
```

## 2. Analysis of CUT&RUN data

### 2.1. Initialize analysis folder

Create a folder for analysis workspace

```bash
mkdir CnR.20201122
cd CnR.20201122
```

Initialize to create template files

```bash
cnr.init.sh
```
which will create three files:
- sample.tsv
- Snakefile
- 0.submit.snakemake.sh


### 2.2. sample.tsv

Tab-separated sample information file with following 7 columns:
- **Id**: Unique sample ID. This is used for the output files of adapter trimming. 
- **Name**: Sample name. This becomes the output folder name for each sample
- **Group**: Sample group. No specific use in the process of each sample but will be used for replicate-pooling and group-wise analysis later
- **Fq1 & 2**: Name of fastq files, Read1 & 2 (Paired-end sequencing is assumed always)
- **Ctrl**: Name of control sample from the "Name" column for peak calling. Use "NULL" for peak calling without a control.
- **PeakMode**: Peak mode among {factor,histone,NULL}. If "NULL", no peak calling is performed, e.g. for IgG samples.

Note:
- No white space is allowed in the file except for the column separator, tab.
- **Id** and **Name** columns must contain unique values not overlapping with other samples

Example:

|Id|Name|Group|Fq1|Fq2|Ctrl|PeakMode|
|--|----|-----|---|---|----|--------|
|sample1|hPSC_Foxa1_rep1|hPSC_Foxa1|sample1_R1.fq.gz|sample1_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|factor|
|sample2|hPSC_Foxa1_rep2|hPSC_Foxa1|sample2_R1.fq.gz|sample2_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|factor|
|sample3|hPSC_IgG|hPSC_IgG|sample3_R1.fq.gz|sample3_R2.fq.gz|NULL|NULL|
|sample4|hPSC_H3K27me3_rep1|hPSC_H3K27me3|sample4_R1.fq.gz|sample4_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|histone|
|sample5|hPSC_H3K27me3_rep2|hPSC_H3K27me3|sample5_R1.fq.gz|sample5_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|histone|


### 2.3. Snakefile

- File declaring various parameters, files, and outputs.
- Check the comments within the created Snakefile for further information.
- Basically, it is based on python. Mind the grammar.

## 3. Run

Dry run first to see if everything is correctly defined.

```bash
snakemake -np
```

If not error, then submit a job for Snakemake.
```bash
./0.submet.snakemake.sh
```

Check if jobs are automatically created and submitted by Snakemake
```bash
bjobs
```

Commit message:

Plan: remove separate rules for pooled sample processing

README.md, after:

# Cutlery: automated pipeline and utilities for CUT&RUN data analysis

Near-future plan
- Remove "Pool" rules
Once bam files are pooled, all the downstream analysis is the same
Therefore, it is more logical and simple to have one script for bam file pooling utilizig sample.tsv


## 0. Prerequisite

### 0.1. LimLabBase

This pipeline heavily relies on LimLabBase. Therefore, setup github.com/LimLabBase first.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimLabBase
```
And add the subfolders of the LimLabBase in the PATH of .bash_profile or .bashrc

### 0.2. Other software packages

Mostly available in the HPC/BMI

- Homer
- cutadapt
- STAR (> v2.7.4)
- bedtools
- samtools
- bedGraphToBigWig (UCSC utilities)
- bwtool
- gawk
- sed
- R


## 1. Setting Cutlery for CUT&RUN data analysis

### 1.1. Git clone:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/hwlim/Cutlery
```

### 1.2. Declare environment for Cutlery in .bash_profile (or .bashrc)

```bash
# For Cutlery location
# This environment variable is used in many Cutlery scripts to locate basic resource
# Replace <path_to_Cutlery> with as needed
export CUTLERY=<path_to_Cutlery>

# PATH for Cutlery scripts and executables
export PATH=${PATH}:${CUTLERY}
```

## 2. Analysis of CUT&RUN data

### 2.1. Initialize analysis folder

Create a folder for analysis workspace

```bash
mkdir CnR.20201122
cd CnR.20201122
```

Initialize to create template files

```bash
cnr.init.sh
```
which will create three files:
- sample.tsv
- Snakefile
- 0.submit.snakemake.sh


### 2.2. sample.tsv

Tab-separated sample information file with following 7 columns:
- **Id**: Unique sample ID. This is used for the output files of adapter trimming. 
- **Name**: Sample name. This becomes the output folder name for each sample
- **Group**: Sample group. No specific use in the process of each sample but will be used for replicate-pooling and group-wise analysis later
- **Fq1 & 2**: Name of fastq files, Read1 & 2 (Paired-end sequencing is assumed always)
- **Ctrl**: Name of control sample from the "Name" column for peak calling. Use "NULL" for peak calling without a control.
- **PeakMode**: Peak mode among {factor,histone,NULL}. If "NULL", no peak calling is performed, e.g. for IgG samples.

Note:
- No white space is allowed in the file except for the column separator, tab.
- **Id** and **Name** columns must contain unique values not overlapping with other samples

Example:

|Id|Name|Group|Fq1|Fq2|Ctrl|PeakMode|
|--|----|-----|---|---|----|--------|
|sample1|hPSC_Foxa1_rep1|hPSC_Foxa1|sample1_R1.fq.gz|sample1_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|factor|
|sample2|hPSC_Foxa1_rep2|hPSC_Foxa1|sample2_R1.fq.gz|sample2_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|factor|
|sample3|hPSC_IgG|hPSC_IgG|sample3_R1.fq.gz|sample3_R2.fq.gz|NULL|NULL|
|sample4|hPSC_H3K27me3_rep1|hPSC_H3K27me3|sample4_R1.fq.gz|sample4_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|histone|
|sample5|hPSC_H3K27me3_rep2|hPSC_H3K27me3|sample5_R1.fq.gz|sample5_R2.fq.gz|hPSC_IgG|histone|


### 2.3. Snakefile

- File declaring various parameters, files, and outputs.
- Check the comments within the created Snakefile for further information.
- Basically, it is based on python. Mind the grammar.

## 3. Run

Dry run first to see if everything is correctly defined.

```bash
snakemake -np
```

If not error, then submit a job for Snakemake.
```bash
./0.submet.snakemake.sh
```

Check if jobs are automatically created and submitted by Snakemake
```bash
bjobs
```
